# [Object Assign](https://learn.co/tracks/online-software-engineering-structured/front-end-web-programming/es6-syntax-sugar/object-assign)

## Resources

- [Object.assign at Mozilla Developer Network](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/assign)

## Introduction

In JavaScript, we have access to a global `Object` that comes with several
helpful methods ready for us to use. One of these methods is `Object.assign()`,
which allows us to combine properties from multiple `Object`s into a single
`Object`.

## Identify `Object.assign()`

The first argument passed to `Object.assign()` is the first `Object` into which
all of the properties are merged. Every additional argument is an `Object` whose
properties we want to merge into the first `Object`:

```js
Object.assign(firstObject, secondObject, thirdObject, ...);
```

The return value of `Object.assign()` is the first `Object` after all of the
additional `Object`s' properties have been merged in:

```js
Object.assign({ eggs: 3 }, { flour: '1 cup' });
// => { eggs: 3, flour: "1 cup" }

Object.assign({ eggs: 3 }, { chocolateChips: '1 cup', flour: '2 cups' }, { flour: '1/2 cup' });
// { eggs: 3, chocolateChips: "1 cup", flour: "1/2 cup" }
```

**If multiple
`Object`s have a property with the same key, the last key to be defined wins
out**. Essentially, the last call to `Object.assign()` in the above snippet is
wrapping all of the following assignments into a single line of code:

```js
const recipe = { eggs: 3 };

recipe.chocolateChips = '1 cup';

recipe.flour = '2 cups';

recipe.flour = '1/2 cup';
```

## Non-Destructively Assign New Data with `Object.assign()`

A common pattern for `Object.assign()` is to provide an empty `Object` as the
first argument. That way we're providing an entirely new `Object` instead of
modifying or overwriting the properties of an existing `Object`.

```js
function nondestructivelyUpdateObject(obj, key, value) {
  return Object.assign({}, obj, { [key]: value });
}

const recipe = { eggs: 3 };

const newRecipe = nondestructivelyUpdateObject(recipe, 'chocolate', '1 cup');
// => { eggs: 3, chocolate: "1 cup" }

newRecipe;
// => { eggs: 3, chocolate: "1 cup" }

recipe;
// => { eggs: 3 }
```

## Explain Performance Gains from non-Destructive Updates

Doing non-destructive updates (i.e. "creating new things and merging on top")
is a really important pattern. It turns out that, in many places, non-destructive
updates are _more performant_. The main reason on this is when you add something
to an existing `Object`, the computer has to make sure that the `Object` has
enough room to add what you're saying to add. If it doesn't, the computer needs
to do cleanup work, find some more space, copy the old thing over, add the new,
thing, and then resume work, etc. That "accounting" process is actually quite
slow.

`Object.assign`, however, avoids all that and says: "Hey, I created a thing that
looks like this, give me space for it." This is faster.

