# [Default, Res, Spread as Function Arguments](https://learn.co/tracks/online-software-engineering-structured/front-end-web-programming/es6-syntax-sugar/default-rest-spread-as-function-arguments)

## Resources

* [Default parameters][]
* [Rest parameters][]
* [Spread operators][]

[Default parameters]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Default_parameters
[Rest parameters]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/rest_parameters
[Spread operators]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Spread_syntax

## Introduction

Unlike most modern programming languages like Ruby or Python,
JavaScript didn't have a way to pass a default parameter into a function.
However, with the introduction of ES2016, that is no longer the case. It also
introduced two other helpful parameters, the `rest` parameter and the `spread`
operator.

## Use JavaScript's Default Function Argument as a Parameter in a Function

Let's say you work for an e-commerce site, and you're prepping for your
post-holiday sales. You're working on some code for your website and you need to
set a discount of 25% across the board for everything that you sell on the
website.

We have a function that takes in an `itemPrice` as a price in dollars and a
`discount` as a percentage, and returns the total amount due:

```js
function discountedPrice(itemPrice){
    return itemPrice - (itemPrice * 0.25)
}
```

But it seems unwise to hard-code the discount to `0.25`. Management's whims on
discount rates change almost daily, as the corporate sales offices' machine-learning
algorithms recommend new discount rates. Because of this, we want to encode the
discount rate as a _parameter_ of the function.

```js
function discountedPrice(itemPrice, discount){
    return itemPrice - (itemPrice * discount)
}
```

So, calls to `discountedPrice` will look like:

```js
function discountedPrice(itemPrice, discount){
    return itemPrice - (itemPrice * discount)
}
discountedPrice(100, 0.25) //=> 75.0
```

But it _also_ seems a bit of a burden to **have** to pass the discount amount
on every call. We'd like `discount` to _default_ to `0.25`. It'll be 25%
off _unless_ we choose to pass a new discount percentage into `discountedPrice`.

When writing functions that have _parameters_ that take default values, it's
best practice to put them at the **end** of the parameter list.

```js
function discountedPrice(itemPrice, discount = 0.25){
    return itemPrice - (itemPrice * discount)
}
discountedPrice(100) //=> 75.0
discountedPrice(100, 0.5) //=> 50.0
```

What would happen if we added `tax` to `discountedPrice` so that we could
add a tax percentage to be added to the sales price? We'll honor best
pratices and put `tax` before `discount`.

```js
function discountedAndTaxedPrice(itemPrice, tax, discount = 0.25){
    return itemPrice - (itemPrice * discount) + (itemPrice * tax)
}
discountedAndTaxedPrice(100, 0.15) //=> 90
```

## Use JavaScript's `rest` Parameter as a Parameter in a Function

You might have heard a little bit about JavaScript's magical "three dots". These three
dots allow you to do two very different things - the `rest` parameter and the
`spread` operator. The `rest` parameter allows you to collect the `rest` of your
remaining parameters that you are passing into your function into an array,
while the `spread` operator allows you to pass elements of an array into a
function as an argument.

Sometimes, we might not know exactly how many arguments we want to pass into a
function, but we might know that we only want to do something with the first two
arguments. In JavaScript, it's possible to pass in any number of arguments into
a function.

```js

function muppet_lab(a,b){
  console.log(a,b) // Dr. Bunson Beaker
}

muppet_lab("Dr. Bunson", "Beaker", "Miss Piggy", "Kermit", "Animal")
```

But what happens if we want to capture the rest of the arguments
that are left over? The `rest` parameter allows us to take the rest of the
arguments that we pass into the function, and gather them into an array. Here's
how this works:

```js
function muppet_lab(a, b, ...muppets) {
  console.log(a, ' ', b); // Dr. Bunson Beaker

  console.log(muppets); // ["Miss Piggy", "Kermit", "Animal"]
  console.log(muppets[0]); // Miss Piggy
  console.log(muppets.length); // 3
}

muppet_lab("Dr. Bunson", "Beaker", "Miss Piggy", "Kermit", "Animal")
```

Since the `rest` parameter gathers the rest of the parameters given to a
function, it should always come at the end of a list of parameters.

## Use JavaScript's `spread` Operator as a Parameter in a Function

With the `rest` operator, JavaScript allowed us to put the remaining arguments
into an array. The `spread` operator allows us to pass elements of an array into
a function as an argument.

```js
function add(a, b, c) {
  return a + b + c ;
}
const arr = [1, 2, 3];

add(...arr); // returns 6
```

So what's happening here? We have a simple add function, with three arguments,
and we are passing in an array using the `spread` operator. The function is
adding all three numbers contained within the array.

## Conclusion

Since the syntax here is similar, how do we know when JavaScript is using the
`spread` operator and when it's using the `rest` parameter? It's all about
context. If the three dots occur when you are calling the function, then it's
the `spread` operator. If they happen when you're defining the function, it's
the `rest` parameter.