# [JavaScript Fundamentals: Comparisons](https://learn.co/tracks/online-software-engineering-structured/front-end-web-programming/formalizing-js-data-types-comparisons-conditionals/js-fundamentals-comparisons)

## Resources

## Introduction

JavaScript has additional operators for comparing values. The value
returned by a comparison is **always** `true` or `false`.

## Identify equality operators

There are four equality operators built into JavaScript:

- **strict equality operator** (`===`)
- **strict inequality operator** (`!==`)
- **loose equality operator** (`==`)
- **loose inequality operator** (`!=`)

When writing JavaScript, you strongly prefer the **strict** operators, as the
loose operators will return true even if the data types aren't the same. A
string '42' is _not_ the same as an integer 42. As developers we want to ensure
that not only are the values the same, but also the data types.

### Strict Equality Operator `===` and Strict Inequality Operator `!==`

The **strict equality operator** returns `true` if two values are equal _without
performing type conversions_.

The **strict inequality operator** returns `true` if two values are _not_ equal
and does not perform type conversions.

***You should prefer `===` and `!==` for comparisons***.

### Loose Equality Operator `==` and Loose Inequality Operator `!=`

The **loose equality operator** returns `true` if two values are equal:

```js
42 == 42
// => true
```

However, it will _also_ return `true` if it can perform a type conversion (e.g.,
changing the string `'42'` into the number `42`) that makes the two values
equal.

```js
42 == '42'
// => true
```

The **loose inequality operator** is the opposite of `==`. It returns `true` if
two values are _not_ equal, performing type conversions as necessary:

```js
9000 != 9001
// => true

9001 != '9001'
// => false

[] != ''
// => false
```

This is confusing and inaccurate! It makes no sense that the string `'0'` is
equal to the boolean `false` or that `null` and `undefined` — two **completely
different** data types — are equivalent.

***You should prefer `===` and `!==` for comparisons***.

## Compare Numbers with Relational Operators

There are four relational operators built in to JavaScript:
- **greater than** (`>`),
- **greater than or equals** (`>=`)
- **less than** (`<`)
- **less than or equals** (`<=`)

These operators work in a very similar way to the equality operators:

```js
88 > 9
// => true
```

However, beware of type conversion when comparing non-numbers against numbers.
For instance, when a string is compared with a number, the JavaScript engine
tries to convert the string to a number:

```js
88 > '9'
// => true
```

If the engine can't convert the string into a number, the comparison will always
return `false`:

```js
88 >= 'hello'
// => false

88 <= 'hello'
// => false
```

Strings are compared with other strings lexicographically, meaning
character-by-character from left-to-right. The following returns `false` because
the Unicode value of `8`, the first character in `88`, is less than the Unicode
value of `9`.

```js
'88' > '9'
// => false
```
If you aren't sure what data type you are going to be receiving, but you still
need to compare them, make sure that you tell JavaScript to [convert the string
to a number first](https://gomakethings.com/converting-strings-to-numbers-with-vanilla-javascript/), and then compare.

***Top Tip***: Stick to comparing _numerical_ values with the relational
 operators and you'll be golden.

 ## Conclusion

JavaScript contains both equality and comparison operators that assist us in
writing functional code. Make sure you're preferring the strict equality
operators, and only comparing numerical values with the relational operators,
and you'll avoid those annoying troubleshooting errors that can be time consuming!