# [JS Fundamentals - Conditionals](https://learn.co/tracks/online-software-engineering-structured/front-end-web-programming/formalizing-js-data-types-comparisons-conditionals/js-fundamentals-conditionals)

## Resources

- MDN
  - [Expressions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Expressions_and_Operators#Expressions)
  - [Block statement](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/block)
  - [Truthy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Truthy) and [falsy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Falsy)
  - [Conditional statements](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Control_flow_and_error_handling#Conditional_statements)
  - [`if...else` statement](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/if...else)
  - [Conditional (ternary) operator](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Conditional_Operator)
  - [`switch` statement](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/switch)

## Introduction

Consider this real-life scenario: If you're hungry, you make a meal. If the
traffic light is green, you press the car's gas pedal. If a bill is due, then
you pay the bill.

Writing code involves the same type of logic -- we only want an action to happen
_if_ a certain condition is met. In the programming world, this is called
**control flow** because, it helps _control_ the _flow_ of an application.

Let's go over a few concepts that provide the syntactic underpinnings.

## Explain What Constitutes an Expression in JavaScript

A JavaScript expression is **a unit of code that returns a value**.

### Primitives

Primitive values are expressions because they resolve to a value:

```js
9;
// => 9

('Hello, world!');
// => "Hello, world!"

false;
// => false
```

### Arithmetric & String Operations Expressions

This code resolves to the number `64`:

```js
8 * 8;
// => 64
```

This resolves to the string `"Hello, world!"`:

```js
'Hello, ' + 'world!';
// => "Hello, world!"
```

### Comparison and Assignment Expressions

This comparison resolves to the boolean `true`:

```js
2 > 1;
// => true
```

### Variable Declarations, Assignments, and References

Variable declarations are **NOT** expressions...

```js
let answer;
```

Variable assignments **ARE**, resolving to the assigned value (`42`, in this
case):

```js
answer = 42;
// => 42
```

Finally, references to variables are also expressions, resolving to the value
contained in the variable:

```js
const fullName = 'Ada Lovelace';

fullName;
// => "Ada Lovelace"
```

## Organize Code Using Block Statements

A _block statement_ is a pair of curly braces (`{ }`) used to group JavaScript
statements. It plays a role in conditional statements, loops, and
functions.

```js
{
  ('This line is a JavaScript statement nested inside a block statement!');

  // This is also a statement nested inside a block:
  5 * 5 - 5;

  // And so are these:
  const weCan = 'group multiple statements';

  const suchAs = 'these variable declarations';

  const insideA = 'block statement.';
}
// => 20
```

Block statements return the value of the last evaluated expression inside the
curly braces. Remember, the variable declarations are _not_ expressions, so the
value of `5 * 5 - 5` is returned.

**Note**: The statement above _implicitly_ returns `20`, the value returned by
`5 * 5 - 5`, when evaluated. The **implicit return is something unique to block statements**
like the ones we use for `if...else` and loop statements. In the case of functions,
we need to _explicitly_ use the word `return` to tell JavaScript what we want
the output to be (if we want one, at all).

## Describe the Difference Between Truthy and Falsy Values

_Truthiness_ and _falsiness_ indicate what happens when the value is converted into
a boolean. If, upon conversion, the value becomes `true`, we say that it's a
**truthy** value. If it becomes `false`, we say that it's **falsy**.

In JavaScript, the following values are **falsy**:

- `false`
- `null`
- `undefined`
- `0`
- `NaN`
- An empty string (` `` `, `''`, `""`)

**_Every other value is truthy_**.

To check whether a value is truthy or falsy in our browser's JS console, we can
pass it to the global `Boolean` object, which converts the value into its
boolean equivalent:

```js
Boolean(false);
// => false

Boolean(null);
// => false

Boolean(undefined);
// => false

Boolean(0);
// => false

Boolean(NaN);
// => false

Boolean('');
// => false

Boolean(true);
// => true

Boolean(42);
// => true

Boolean('Hello, world!');
// => true

Boolean({ firstName: 'Jean-Luc', lastName: 'Picard' });
// => true
```

**Note**: `document.all` is also falsy, but don't worry about too much
-- it's an imperfect solution for legacy code compatibility.

## Learn to Use Conditional Statements

In JavaScript, we use three structures for implementing condition-based control
flow: the `if...else` statement, `switch` statement, and ternary operator.

### `if` statement

`if` statements are the most common type of conditional, and they're pretty
straightforward:

```js
if (condition) {
  // Block of code to run if condition returns a truthy value, do nothing if falsey
}
```

### `else`

If we want to run some code when the condition returns a `falsy` value, we can
use an `else` clause:

```js
const age = 14;

let isAdult;

if (age >= 18) {
  isAdult = true;
} else {
  isAdult = false;
}
// => false

isAdult;
// => false
```

### Nested Conditionals

If we have multiple overlapping conditions, we can employ nested conditional
statements.

```js
const age = 17;

let isAdult, canWork, canEnlist, canDrink;

if (age >= 16) {
  canWork = true;

  if (age >= 18) {
    isAdult = true;
    canEnlist = true;

    if (age >= 21) {
      canDrink = true;
    }
  }
}

isAdult;
// => undefined

canWork;
// => true

canEnlist;
// => undefined

canDrink;
// => undefined
```

### `else if`

Another way to represent multiple possible conditions is with `else if` clauses:

```js
const age = 20;

let isAdult, canWork, canEnlist, canDrink;

if (age >= 21) {
  isAdult = true;
  canWork = true;
  canEnlist = true;
  canDrink = true;
} else if (age >= 18) {
  isAdult = true;
  canWork = true;
  canEnlist = true;
} else if (age >= 16) {
  canWork = true;
}
// => true

isAdult;
// => true

canWork;
// => true

canEnlist;
// => true

canDrink;
// => undefined
```

## `switch`

Running multiple blocks in the same control flow is one of the many talents of
the `switch` statement. The general structure is as follows:

```js
switch (expression) {
  case value1:
    // Statements
    break;
  case value2:
    // Statements
    break;
  default:
    // Statements
    break;
}
```

The JavaScript engine evaluates the expression and then compares the returned
value against each of the `case` values _using strict equality_ (`===`):

```js
const hunger = 'famished';

let food;

switch (hunger) {
  case 'light':
    food = 'grapes';
    break;
  case 'moderate':
    food = 'sushi';
    break;
  case 'famished':
    food = 'lasagna';
    break;
}
// => "lasagna"

food;
// => "lasagna"
```

Generally, we use a `switch` statement if we need a conditional that hinges on
a single value but requires a separate handler for each potential case.

We can also assign the same set of statements to multiple cases. In the
following example, if the `age` variable contains any number between `13` and
`19`, the `isTeenager` variable will be set to `true`. If it contains anything
other than a number between `13` and `19`, none of our `case`s will hit, and it
will end up at the `default`, which sets `isTeenager` to `false`:

```js
const age = 15;

let isTeenager;

switch (age) {
  case 13:
  case 14:
  case 15:
  case 16:
  case 17:
  case 18:
  case 19:
    isTeenager = true;
    break;
  default:
    isTeenager = false;
}
```

The `default` and `break` keywords are both optional in basic `switch`
statements, but useful. In more complicated statements, they become necessary
to ensure the correct flow.

### `break`

In the previous example, `break` is used to stop the `switch` statement from
continuing to look at case statements.

You will often see switch statements where `break` is
used in every case as a way to ensure there is no unexpected behavior from
multiple cases executing.

However, sometimes we do want to potentially match multiple cases, and we will
need to leave out `break` in order to do this. There's a neat little trick we
can employ that allows us to use comparisons for `case` statements. Let's
rewrite the above `if...else` chain as a more compact, less repetitious `switch`
statement:

```js
const age = 20;

let isAdult, canWork, canEnlist, canDrink;

switch (true) {
  case age >= 21:
    canDrink = true;
  case age >= 18:
    isAdult = true;
    canEnlist = true;
  case age >= 16:
    canWork = true;
}
// => true

isAdult;
// => true

canWork;
// => true

canEnlist;
// => true

canDrink;
// => undefined
```

We specified `true` as the value to `switch` on. All of our `case`s are
comparisons, and if the comparison returns `true` its statements will be run.
Because we did not include any `break` statements, once _one_ case statement
matches, all subsequent statements will execute.

With `age` set to `20` in the above example, the first `case`, `age >= 21`,
returns `false` and so the assignment of `canDrink` never happens. The engine
then proceeds to the next `case`, `age >= 18`, which returns `true`, assigning
the value `true` to `isAdult` and `canEnlist`. Since it encounters no `break`
statement, `canWork` is then set to true in the last case statement.

### `default`

The `default` keyword specifies a set of statements to run after all of the
`switch` statement's `case`s have been checked. The only time the `default`
statements do _not_ run is if the engine hits a `break` in one of the `case`
statements.

It's typically safer to include `break` statements because it helps avoid bugs
like this:

```js
const mood = 'happy';

let response;

switch (mood) {
  case 'happy':
    response = 'Heck yea; be happy!';
  case 'sad':
    response = "You're awesome; keep your head up!";
  default:
    response = "Sorry, I don't know how to respond to that mood.";
}
// => "Sorry, I don't know how to respond to that mood."

response;
// => "Sorry, I don't know how to respond to that mood."
```

The `'happy'` case matches and assigns the string `'Heck yea; be happy!'` to
`response`. However, since we didn't `break` after that assignment, the
`default` case _also_ runs and reassigns `"Sorry, I don't know how to respond to that mood."`
to `response`. Whoops!

### Ternary operator

The ternary operator, the final piece of the conditional puzzle, is a good way
to represent an `if...else` statement in a single line of code:

```js
condition ? expression1 : expression2;
```

If the condition returns a truthy value, run the code in `expression1`. If the
condition returns a falsy value, run the code in `expression2`.

```js
const age = 45;
let isAdult;

age >= 18 ? (isAdult = true) : (isAdult = false);
// => true

isAdult;
// => true
```

In the above example, we assign `isAdult` as `true` if the condition returns a
truthy value and as `false` otherwise. We can simplify that a bit and assign
the result of the ternary directly to a variable:

```js
const age = 60;
const isAdult = age >= 18 ? true : false;

isAdult;
// => true
```

**Top Tip:** Be careful to not overuse the ternary operator. It's fine for
slimming down a simple `if...else`, but be conscious of how easy your code is
to understand for an outsider. Remember, you generally write code once, but it
gets read (by yourself and others) **far** more than once. The ternary is often
more difficult to quickly interpret than a regular old `if...else`, so make
sure the reduction in code is worth any potential reduction in readability.
