# [Iterators Drill - Filter](https://learn.co/tracks/online-software-engineering-structured/front-end-web-programming/formalizing-js-data-types-comparisons-conditionals/iterators-drill-filter-lab)

## Resources

- [MDN: Array.prototype.filter()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/filter)

## Introduction

There are many ways to filter in programming, but the easiest is to use `filter()`.

## Define How the `filter()` Method Works

You can think of `filter()` as a `for` loop that specifically
keeps or filters out certain values from an array.

## Demonstrate `filter()`

The `filter()` method creates a new `Array` with all elements that pass certain tests provided
function. Filter receives the same arguments as `map` (current item, index, and entire array)
in the callback function, and works very similarly. The only difference is that the callback
needs to return either _true_ or _false_. If it returns _true_, the array keeps that element.
If it returns false that element is filtered out.

Here is an example:

```js
let arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6];
let even = arr.filter(n => {
  return n % 2 === 0;
});
// even = [2,4,6]
```

This code's function _returns_ true if the element can be divided by 2 with no
remainder (i.e. "is even").

## Use `filter()` to Return Matching Results

We have an array of drivers with various information. We need to write methods using the
`filter()` method so that PickMeUp Taxi service employees can easily query the data. Run the
tests to see what conditions need to be met by each function _before_ you start writing
JavaScript code.

You'll be writing three functions:

### Write a Function To Case-insensitively Match `string`s

Write `findMatching`- This function takes an array of `drivers` and a `string`
as arguments, and returns the matching list of drivers. The function should be
case insensitive.

```JS
function findMatching(arrayOfNames, nameToFind) {
  let results = arrayOfNames.filter(name => name.toLowerCase() === nameToFind.toLowerCase()) 
  return results
}
```

### Write a Function To Partially Match Substrings

Write `fuzzyMatch` - This function takes an array of `drivers` and a `string`
as arguments for querying the array, and returns all drivers whose names begin
with the provided letters.

```JS
function fuzzyMatch(arrayOfNames, beginningOfName) {
  let results = arrayOfNames.filter(name => name.toLowerCase().indexOf(beginningOfName.toLowerCase()) === 0)
  return results
}
```

### Write a Function To Match `object` Values To a Provided `string`

Write `matchName` - This function takes an array of `drivers` and a `string` as
arguments. In this function, each element of the `drivers` array is a
JavaScript object that has a property of `name`. The function should return
each element whose `name` property matches the provided `string` argument.

```JS
function matchName(arrayOfNames, nameToFind) {
  let results = arrayOfNames.filter(n => n.name === nameToFind)
  return results
}
```

## Conclusion

The `filter()` method returns a new array created from all elements in the original array
that meet certain conditions. When we use methods like `filter()`, we work directly with
the current value, instead of accessing it through an index (i.e `array[i]`), avoid mutation
of the original array (minimizing side-effects), and there's no need to manage a `for`
loop with an empty array to push values into.