# Resources & Notes

- [JS Rails API Project Setup Demo](https://github.com/learn-co-curriculum/mod3-project-week-setup-example)

- [JS Project Instructions](https://github.com/learn-co-students/js-spa-project-instructions-online-web-sp-000#technical-and-complexity-requirements)

- [Planning, Tips, and Support](https://github.com/learn-co-students/js-spa-project-instructions-online-web-sp-000/blob/master/project-planning-tips.md)

- [JS Project Setup Walkthrough](https://github.com/learn-co-students/js-spa-project-instructions-online-web-sp-000/blob/master/setup-walkthrough.md)



## Notes

Your Javascript project is an excellent chance for you to show off everything you’ve learned about Rails by applying that knowledge to build out your API AND apply what you've learned about JavaScript by creating your first Single Page Application (SPA).

1. Brainstorm a problem that you want your app to solve.
2. Plan what features your app will have. Write User stories to help make it clear what you are planning to build.
3. Model your domain, know what the nous in your project are.
4. Plan how your features will work.

### Making a User Story

- Who is your User?
- What are their pain points?
- How do they use our solution to overcome this problem?

Some examples of user stories:

- A user is able to view travel locations, add new travel locations, edit travel locations and delete travel locations.
- A user is able to review a travel location
- A user is able to edit and delete a review for a travel location

When you have written the user stories for your application, you can turn them into the technical requirements needed to turn those stories into working features.

### Choosing Your Classes

As you turn your user stories into more clear technical specifications for features, you can start by modeling the data that your application will store and show. Identify the nouns in your stories, their properties, and their relationships.

A description of the domain for the above stories might be:

- A travel location has a name, a description, a location, and an image URL
- A review has a comment and a rating
- A review belongs to one travel location (a travel location has many reviews)
- A travel location has an average rating that is calculated by its aggregate review ratings

Later on, you will be ready to create the database schema and application models corresponding to this domain.

### Making an App Flow Diagram


- How is data passed around your app?
- What classes are used? What are their responsibilities?
- How can I avoid unnecessary duplication of actions?

We recommend using draw.io to put together a flow diagram. It doesn’t need to be over-complicated - just a visual idea of your app’s structure.

### Build

The project process should look like:

1. Planning: Write down your ideas (use diagrams!)
2. Start by creating the frontend and backend directories
3. Build the R from CRUD for just one model, vertically! That means one migration, one model, one controller action, one fetch call, and one DOM update. Add seed data and confirm that your code works by testing it visually.
4. Then, build the next CRUD action (maybe Create or Update), again building vertically.
5. Continue building features one by one, (vertically!)
6. Add feature by feature, not model by model or layer by layer.
7. Test each feature, add styles, and create seed data as you go (not all at once at the end)

