# [Custom JSON Rendering Using Rails](https://learn.co/tracks/online-software-engineering-structured/front-end-web-programming/rails-as-an-api/custom-json-rendering-using-rails)

## Introduction

By using `render json:` in our Rails controller, we can take entire models or
even collections of models, have Rails convert them to JSON, and send them out
on request. We already have the makings of a basic API. In this lesson, we're
going to look at shaping that data that gets converted to JSON and making it more
useful to us from the frontend JavaScript perspective.

The way we structure our data matters - it can lead to better, simpler code in
the future. By specifically defining what data is being sent via a Rails
controller, we have full control over what data our frontend has access to.

## Adding Additional Routes to Separate JSON Data 

The simplest way to make data more useful to us is to provide more routes and
actions that help to divide and organize our data. For instance, we could add a
`show` action to allow us to send specific record/model instances. First, we'd
add a route:

```ruby
Rails.application.routes.draw do
  get '/birds' => 'birds#index'
  get '/birds/:id' => 'birds#show' # new
end
```

Then we could add an additional action:

```ruby
class BirdsController < ApplicationController
  def index
    birds = Bird.all
    render json: birds
  end

  def show
    bird = Bird.find_by(id: params[:id])
    render json: bird
  end
end
```

> **Reminder:** No need for instance variables anymore, since we're immediately
> rendering `birds` and `bird` to JSON and are not going to be using ERB.

Now, visiting `http://localhost:3000/birds` will produce an array of `Bird`
objects, but `http://localhost:3000/birds/2` will produce just one:

```ruby
{
  "id": 2,
  "name": "Grackle",
  "species": "Quiscalus Quiscula",
  "created_at": "2019-05-09T21:51:41.543Z",
  "updated_at": "2019-05-09T21:51:41.543Z"
}
```

We can use multiple routes to differentiate between specific requests. In an
API, these are typically referred to as endpoints. A user of the API uses
endpoints to access specific pieces of data. Just like a normal Rails app,
we can create full CRUD based controllers that only render JSON. 

## Removing Content When Rendering

Sometimes, when sending JSON data, such as an entire model, we don't want or
need to send the entire thing. Some data is sensitive, for instance. An API that
sends user information might contain details of a user internally that it
does not want to ever share externally. Sometimes, data is just extra 
clutter we don't need. Consider, for instance, the last piece of data:

```ruby
{
  "id": 2,
  "name": "Grackle",
  "species": "Quiscalus Quiscula",
  "created_at": "2019-05-09T21:51:41.543Z",
  "updated_at": "2019-05-09T21:51:41.543Z"
}
```

For our bird watching purposes, we probably don't need bits of data like
`created_at` and `updated_at`. Rather than send this unnecessary info when
rendering, we could just pick and choose what we want to send:

```ruby
def show
  bird = Bird.find_by(id: params[:id])
  render json: {id: bird.id, name: bird.name, species: bird.species } 
end
```

Here, we've created a new hash out of three keys, assigning the keys manually
with the attributes of `bird`.

The result is that when we visit a specific bird's endpoint, like
`http://localhost:3000/birds/3`, we'll see just the id, name and species:

```js
{
  "id": "3",
  "name": "Common Starling",
  "species": "Sturnus Vulgaris"
}
```

Another option would be to use Ruby's built-in `slice` method. On the `show`
action, that would look like this:

```ruby
def show
  bird = Bird.find_by(id: params[:id])
  render json: bird.slice(:id, :name, :species)
end
```

This achieves the same result but in a slightly different way. Rather than
having to spell out each key, the `Hash` [`slice` method][slice] returns a _new_
hash with only the keys that are passed into `slice`. In this case, `:id`,
`:name`, and `:species` were passed in, so `created_at` and `updated_at` get
left out, just like before.

[slice]: https://ruby-doc.org/core-2.5.0/Hash.html#method-i-slice

```js
{
  "id": "3",
  "name": "Common Starling",
  "species": "Sturnus Vulgaris"
}
```

Cool, but once again, Rails has one better. While `slice` works fine for a
single hash, as with `bird`, it won't work for an array of hashes like the one
we have in our `index` action:

```ruby
def index
  birds = Bird.all
  render json: birds
end
```

In this case, we can add in the `only:` option directly after listing an object
we want to render to JSON:

```ruby
def index
  birds = Bird.all
  render json: birds, only: [:id, :name, :species]
end
```

Visiting or fetching `http://localhost:3000/birds` will now produce our array of
bird objects and each object will _only_ have the `id`, `name` and `species`
values, leaving out everything else.

Alternatively, rather than specifically listing every key we want to include, we
could also exclude particular content using the `except:` option, like so:

```ruby
def index
  birds = Bird.all
  render json: birds, except: [:created_at, :updated_at]
end
```


The above code would achieve the same result, producing only `id`, `name`, and
`species` for each bird. All the keys _except_ `created_at` and `updated_at`.

## Drawing Back the Curtain on Rendering JSON Data

As we touched upon briefly in the previous lesson, the controller actions we 
have seen so far have a bit of Rails 'magic' in them that obscures what is actually happening 
in the render statements. The `only` and `except` keywords are actually 
parameters of the `to_json` method, obscured by that magic. The last code snippet can be
rewritten in full to show what is actually happening:

```ruby
def index
  birds = Bird.all
  render json: birds.to_json(except: [:created_at, :updated_at])
end
```

As customization becomes more complicated, writing in sometimes help to clarify what is happening.

## Basic Error Messaging When Rendering JSON Data

With the power to create our own APIs, we also have the power to define what to
do when things go wrong. In our `show` action, we are currently using
`Bird.find_by`, passing in `id: params[:id]`:

```ruby
def show
  bird = Bird.find_by(id: params[:id])
  render json: {id: bird.id, name: bird.name, species: bird.species } 
end
```

When using `find_by`, if the record is not found, `nil` is returned. As we have 
it set up, if `params[:id]` does not match a valid id, `nil` will be assigned to 
the `bird` variable.

As `nil` is a _false-y_ value in Ruby, this gives us the ability to write our
own error messaging in the event that a request is made for a record that
doesn't exist:

```ruby
def show
  bird = Bird.find_by(id: params[:id])
  if bird
    render json: { id: bird.id, name: bird.name, species: bird.species }
  else
    render json: { message: 'Bird not found' }
  end
end
```

Now, if we were to send a request to an invalid endpoint like `http://localhost:3000/birds/hello_birds`,
rather than receiving a general HTTP error, we would still receive a response
from the API:

```js
{
  "message": "Bird not found"
}
```

From here, we could build a more complex response, including additional details
about what might have occurred.