# [Rendering Related Object Data in JSON](https://learn.co/tracks/online-software-engineering-structured/front-end-web-programming/rails-as-an-api/rendering-related-object-data-in-json)

Using `only` and `except`, we can be selective in what attributes we want to
render to JSON in our basic Rails API. But what if we want to be _inclusive_
rather than selective? With Rails models, we're often dealing with many
different related objects. Using `include` when rendering JSON, our API can send
data about one resource along with data about its associated resources.

Within a single controller action, it is possible to render
related models as nested JSON data! 

When nesting models in JSON the way we saw in this lab, it is entirely possible
to use `include` in conjunction with `only` and `exclude`. For instance, if
we wanted to remove the `:updated_at` attribute from `Sighting` when rendered:

```ruby
def show
  sighting = Sighting.find_by(id: params[:id])
  render json: sighting, include: [:bird, :location], except: [:updated_at]
end
```

But this begins to complicate things significantly as we work with nested
resources and try to limit what _they_ display.

For example, to _also_ remove all instances of `:created_at` and `:updated_at`
from the nested bird and location data in the above example, we'd have to
add nesting into the _options_, so the included bird and location data can
have their own options listed. Using the fully written `to_json` render statement
can help keep things a bit more readable here:

```ruby
def show
  sighting = Sighting.find_by(id: params[:id])
  render json: sighting.to_json(:include => {
    :bird => {:only => [:name, :species]},
    :location => {:only => [:latitude, :longitude]}
  }, :except => [:updated_at])
end
```

This does produce a more specific set of data:

```js
{
  "id": 2,
  "bird_id": 2,
  "location_id": 2,
  "created_at": "2019-05-14T11:20:37.228Z",
  "bird": {
    "name": "Grackle",
    "species": "Quiscalus Quiscula"
  },
  "location": {
    "latitude": 30.26715,
    "longitude": -97.74306
  }
}
```

A single sighting of Quiscalus Quiscula on May 14th, 2019 in downtown Austin,
Texas!

While that is neat, it seems silly to have to include such a complicated render
line in our action. In addition, in this example we're only dealing with three
models. Customizing what is rendered in a larger set of nested data could
quickly turn into a major headache.